You've got thousands of federal agents
in Minneapolis, not around safety,
not even around immigration, but to
create a political narrative. [music]
I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro, and today I'm
speaking with the mayor of Minneapolis,
Jacob Fry. Mayor Fry traveled here to
Washington DC to address the US
Conference of Mayors and to meet with
lawmakers
as turmoil over ISIS's presence in
Minneapolis and in cities across the
country continues.
>> This kind of conduct and siege needs to
stop. Not just in Minneapolis,
it needs to stop nationwide. Fry has
been shephering a city riven by
protests, infuriated by the killing of
two American citizens at the hands of
ICE and CBP, and shaken by Operation
[music]
Metro Surge, an aggressive immigration
enforcement operation that has left some
people afraid to leave their homes. We
spoke on Thursday afternoon before he
returned to Minneapolis. Here's my
conversation with Mayor Jacob Fry.
[music]
Mayor Fry, thank you so much for being
here. I really appreciate you taking the
time. Um, we are here in Capitol Hill,
uh, normally not where you find
yourself, but you obviously have been
taking meetings today. You've been at a
mayor's meeting, and I want to talk to
you about that in a little bit, but I
actually want to start our conversation
by asking about a phone call that you
had with President Trump uh, earlier
this week. I'd love to get your
sense of that conversation and if you
can just describe that call to me.
>> First off, never in a million years did
I think that I would be having a a phone
call with President Trump about this
large-scale invasion that we're
experiencing in the city that I love. Uh
so none of this feels normal. Yeah. I
had a reach out from the chief of staff
in Susie Wilds saying that the president
was looking to talk to me. We had
already reached out maybe a couple of
weeks prior looking to have some form of
audience with the president uh so that
we could explain how damaging Operation
Metro Surge has been to Minneapolis and
continues to be. A call was scheduled.
Look, it was a relatively collegial uh
conversation. Um he was flattering
certainly at first with the
>> flattering how what what did he say?
>> He said that I was impressive on the
television um in different words I'm
sure but
>> he watches a lot of TV and watches
people's performances
>> and and what did you say?
>> Thank you. Um I said thank you. I said
well I must have gotten it from my ma uh
who is uh is from Queens. Uh and of
course we talked about uh Flushing and
Fresh Meadows where my my mother grew
up. Uh and we talked just initially
about the East Coast. And then of course
um I made a clear ask that Operation
Metro Surge needed to end. And uh you
know without getting into too many
specifics I I will tell you there was a
broad recognition that the present
status is not okay. That what is
happening needs to change. Uh and of
course there were some changes made
certainly in terms of who was leading
the operation in Minneapolis, a shift
from a combination of Bovino and Gnome
uh to Homeman. But as far as massive
changes in this operation, I'll believe
it when I see it. The troops and the
federal agents need to be drawn down
entirely. this operation needs to end
because it has been devastating to the
people that I care about and I love in
my city.
>> And you imparted that message to the
president at that time.
>> Of course,
>> the president initially said you had a
good call. Um and then he was pretty
complimentary, right? Uh in public,
>> but he posted that you were quote
playing with fire for not being willing
to enforce federal immigration laws,
which sounds like a warning. I mean, how
did you take those words? We were never
going to agree and we have not agreed to
enforce federal immigration law. Why?
First off, that's not our job. Uh I want
our police officers doing their own
work, not somebody else's. I want our
police officers doing the important work
of keeping Minneapolis residents sta
safe, responding to 911 calls, stopping
carjackings, preventing murders, the
work of a police officer in a major
city. You know what I don't want them
doing? I don't want them spending a
single minute hunting down a father that
just dropped his kids off at daycare
who's about to go work a 12-hour shift
who happens to be from Ecuador. And by
the way, this is not some wild out there
like radical leftist principle. This is
a a concept that even Rudy Giuliani is
mayor of New York City adopted. Why?
Because he wants everybody, including
people that are undocumented, to feel
comfortable calling 911 when something
goes down. If you see a crime, call 911.
Rudy Giuliani, the radical leftist Rudy
recognized that when he was mayor, and
it's a concept that I think mayors
around the country also recognize now.
>> After that call, borders are Tom H.
Home. Homeman was dispatched to
Minneapolis to replace, as you
mentioned, Gregory Beavino, who had been
running the operation. And Tom H.
Homeman gave a press conference where he
described interactions with local
leaders, including you, as moving in the
right direction. The word that has been
used is deescalation. And I'm unclear
what that deescalation actually looks
like because what the federal government
has been asking for is that cooperation.
You're saying it's not going to come. So
what exactly is it going to practically
speaking look like if indeed things are
going to deescalate in your city?
>> Well, let's talk about what cooperation
could look like. We do cooperate with
this federal administration and with
previous federal administrations on
keeping people safe in our city. So if
the goal is to drive down homicides and
go after murderers, let's do it. you
know, uh, we have worked with the FBI
and the DEA and the ATF and the US
Attorney's Office and successfully
driven down crime and specifically
shootings to record lows on the north
side of Minneapolis. [snorts] We're
willing to do that work right now if
they want to have strategic and
thoughtful work that is targeted at
criminals. The answer is yes. But why
does this have to be about immigration?
you know, why does it have to be about
whether a person has brown colored skin
or not?
>> Well, the point that they're making is
that this is about immigration
enforcement, um, which is obviously part
of the federal government's job and
always has been.
>> Um, so again, I guess the question is, I
mean, you've talked to Tom Hman now.
What are they asking for and what are
you willing to give? And, you know, vice
versa, what are they willing to concede?
Well, as far as deescalation goes, they
are saying that they will draw down the
resources and personnel that they have
located in our city, which by the way is
ridiculous. Um, an incredibly
disproportionate. We've got 600 police
officers. Uh, they have between 3 and
4,000 federal agents, ICE, and Border
Patrol. They are saying and I'm hopeful
that they are
being honest and candid that those
numbers will be significantly drawn
down.
Um they are saying that the way that ICE
and Border Patrol has been conducting
themselves will change dramatically. So
you know not these kind of marauding
gangs of guys just walking down the
street indiscriminately picking people
up but having more of a targeted
operation. Um, and look, you know,
this is not about ICE doing regular ICE
stuff. What we have seen feels like an
invasion.
>> I'm sure you've heard that a judge has
said that ICE has violated nearly a 100
court orders since its crackdown began
in Minneapolis, which makes me wonder
if you think you can enforce any
agreement really with Homeman and the
federal government considering that
context.
That's the most dangerous question that
anybody can ask because we are in a
world of hurt that goes way beyond
any individual safety if we are talking
about a federal government completely
ignoring court orders.
This is a foundational principle of our
republic. And the battlefield that we
fight on as municipalities and cities
around the country uh isn't one of
warfare. It is one of the law. The
battlefield that we fight on and the
battlefield that we are going to win on
is the law. A precondition uh of that
necessary fight uh is that once the law
has been determined and a court order
comes down that it's going to be
followed. And so this is something that
I get really intense and really pissed
off about. This is not optional. You
follow the law. A court order comes
down. That's what this is about. And we
should have everybody, Democrat and
Republicans, losing it. It should be
deeply concerning, not from an
ideological perspective, but from an
American one.
>> What are the options if they don't do
that?
>> The options you don't even want to think
about. I mean, I see where you're
leading me and you you're doing I'm
curious. Well, not not and again, I'm
not I'm not criticizing it that this is
the concern. And I mean, I I don't even
want to think about what it means if
court orders themselves are literally
disregarded.
>> I want to take a step back and talk
about how we got to this moment. Since
President Trump came back into office,
ICE and CBP have arrived in many cities
with differing outcomes. What was the
moment that you realized that
Minneapolis was becoming the face of the
fight between the federal government and
blue states?
I think it's a realization that is still
occurring today.
Uh you know we get stuck, we all get
stuck in the local morass of our local
politics and our daily lives and
obviously you know that something wild
and unconstitutional is happening in
your city but you don't necessarily know
that you're the focal point of all of
it. you know, um, and I came here today,
um, went to the US Conference of Mayors
and they all know what's going on. I
talked to a bunch of senators and
they're very cleareyed at what is taking
place in the city that I love. Uh, and
so I I'd say it's a gradual realization,
but a lot of that realization came just
in the last several hours as to, you
know, the full scope. It it not that I
didn't know it, but it hits you in full.
Um the other
uh epiphany or realization I guess um
it came when we started hearing about a
massive deployment coming to
Minneapolis. At the time it was to go
after our Somali community
uh which I found then and find now to be
completely
nuts. This was off the back of uh the
scandal over fraud. Yeah.
>> Um at the state level.
>> That's right. I remember first off just
thinking there was this massive
disjoint.
Go after the fraudsters.
There was a substantial amount of fraud
that has taken place in Minnesota. To be
very clear, it's real. It happened.
>> And in fact, one of your aids was um
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. prosecuted for that.
>> It's very real. Um, and when uh fraud
like that takes place, you investigate,
you charge,
uh, you arrest, and yeah, the fraudster
goes to jail as an individual. They go
to jail as an individual. You don't hold
an entire community or good lord, an
entire city accountable for the actions
of some. You hold the individuals
accountable. And there was this attack,
a very broadscale attack um specifically
on our Somali community. And I speculate
and I'm speculating that somebody from
pretty high up in the Trump
administration uh said go to
Minneapolis, arrest and deport a bunch
of Somali and there wasn't the proper
push back on the directive only for them
to get here and realize they're American
citizens. They're here legally. They got
here on a plane. They got to Minneapolis
on, you know, Delta. And so obviously
then they diverted and started very they
started targeting our Latino community
and our Southeast Asian community. And
next thing you know, you've got
thousands of federal agents in
Minneapolis, not around safety, not even
around immigration, but to create a
political narrative.
uh to have this political retribution
instituted in a city where you've got a
local mayor and a governor that do not
agree with the president's agenda.
>> I want to turn to your city and the
people of Minneapolis themselves. We've
seen a real network of protests um
spring up. Um Governor Tim Waltz has
called on people to videotape ICE agents
and that is of course legal. But do you
agree that politicians should be
encouraging that
>> to tape what's going on? Look, sunlight
is the best disinfectant. Um, our police
officers have body cameras. They like
using the body cameras because it also
protects them. If they do the right
thing, they know that they're going to
get supported and they know that it'll
be visible to both their bosses, the
chain of command, and the broader
public. Uh, so do I support people
actively recording what's taking place
in public? Yeah, I support that.
Absolutely. I mean, it's called in
public for a reason. It's happening in
public. Imagine if we didn't have some
of these recordings. Imagine if the
shooting that took place recently of
Alex Prey was not uh recorded for
everybody to see. Then we'd be running
with these garbage narratives that are
created by the federal government that
are false and we all be living in a lie.
>> And I certainly don't want that. I don't
think anybody would support that.
>> Yeah, those videos have indeed been
crucial. It's how people saw what
happened to Renee Good, Alex Prey. But
critics accuse the protesters of
impeding ICE um operations and I'm just
curious what you think about the tactics
that have been employed.
>> Well, there's a difference between
impeding and videotaping.
>> Haven't we seen both?
>> Yes, we have. Um what I am advocating
for and what I believe Governor Walls
said was by all means whip out your cell
phone and take a video. um
the the action of having something
recorded
uh is not a physical impediment, perhaps
a moral one, and I want that moral
impediment there.
>> One of the things that also struck me um
about the protest movement is how it's
really shown the limits of what
politicians can do in some ways um
especially at a local level. I mean,
earlier this week, Anderson Cooper from
CNN interviewed Stella Carlson, a woman
who captured video of Alex Prey being
shot and killed, and she said, and I'm
quoting here, "I think people are
feeling like there's nobody here to help
us. There's nobody who can step in to
protect us." What would you say to that?
>> Well, first, let me applaud the tens of
thousands of people in Minneapolis and
in Minnesota that have been just
standing up for their neighbors. Uh, and
perhaps that's a phrase that gets overly
used, standing up for your neighbors,
but they are doing it in such a
beautiful form. Um, and whether that's
encouraging constitutional conduct
through videotaping and transparency or
that's taking your neighbor to the
grocery store that is terrified to go
outside or or collecting food and giving
it to them or uh watch stand and watch
outside of a daycare. I mean, we have
seen so many people stand up for their
neighbors, and I've never been prouder,
never been more proud to be part of
Minneapolis. And of course, there are
limitations on what we're able to do at
any level of government. Um, and there's
also those limitations are not just
baked in under the law. It's also baked
in on the practical reality of where we
find ourselves right now. Um,
>> explain.
>> Not going to outgun the federal
government. Uh not to mention that would
be wildly dangerous for the very
communities that we want to protect.
Um nobody wants that. Now fortunately uh
we don't need to [snorts] fight in a
physical format. We don't want that.
Nobody wants that. Uh we can fight in a
legal one. We can have the law be the
court and the battlefield. uh and we
believe that we're on the right side of
it and we believe it's a battle that
we're going to win.
>> You know, a lot of the focus has been on
what's happening to American citizens in
Minneapolis, but of course, the
government says that this is about
immigration and rounding up those who
are here illegally. Do you know how many
people have been arrested and how many
have been actually identified from the
people living in your community? I mean,
what what do you know about that's been
rounded up?
>> No. Well, not enough is the answer. No,
I I do not know. Uh look, we get regular
report outs. We have sit reps uh often
times multiple times per day where we
get readouts of those that have been
reported through 911. Um we get readouts
of uh interactions that we've seen or
heard about on the street. Um to say
that it is disconcerting would be a
massive understatement, but do I know
the precise number of people that have
been impacted? No. It's way too many.
Staying with the protesters though, you
know, um, H Homeman at his press
conference promised that justice is
coming. I've heard [clears throat] those
on the right describe the protesters as
a mob. We've seen the words domestic
terrorist use. We know the federal
government has been gathering
information on the protesters.
What do you think happens with all that
information? What what happens next?
>> I don't know that I can predict entirely
what happens next. We are big proponents
of first amendment speech and in
Minneapolis people live by it. I mean
they they they are first amendment
enthusiasts. I mean we we have protests
are a fairly normal thing and
your first amendment rights stop at the
next person's nose. Uh and we've made
that very clear and and where people
have crossed the line and it has
happened including last night uh they're
arrested. There's consequence because
you can't have that in a city. But we
are seeing the Department of Justice
weaponized against people that have done
nothing wrong. Uh we are seeing
conclusions drawn from interactions that
took place that were entirely peaceful.
Um Alex Bddy was filming with his
camera. He was trying to help a woman
that was in need. At no point was he
threatening federal agents during that
interaction. And nonetheless, they try
to concoct a narrative that just is
false.
>> I just want to also note that there's
been um new videos circulating that show
Alex Prey spitting at kicking an ICE
vehicle 11 days before he was killed. I
mean, do you think that changes anything
about his case?
>> Not the killing. I mean, are we saying
that something that happened 11 days
prior justified a fatal shooting 11 days
later? That doesn't make a lot of sense.
you know, you have had a pretty um
difficult run as mayor. This is your
third term. Since you became mayor in
2018,
you have had to deal with a global
pandemic. Then in the midst of that, of
course, George Floyd was killed in
Minneapolis. Um and you know, it struck
me at that time you got a lot of
criticism from the more progressive left
for refusing to abolish the police
department, which became a real rallying
cry. and your position has aged pretty
well politically because the Democratic
Party at large has sort of moved away
from that position and I'm wondering if
that's on your mind at this moment
>> as there are calls to abolish ICE.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah. At least from my political past, I
have a history of being right a little
bit too early. And obviously over time
the position that I had at the time
which was deep reform and change to a
police department that needed it is now
the position that virtually everybody
holds. And by the way they have reformed
and they have changed and they're
getting credit from some of the police
department's biggest critics
traditionally especially when you look
at the justosition between the way they
act and have been acting and the
community relations that they've built
out and the way that ICE is conducting
themselves. And now, of course, there's
this call to abolish ICE.
>> And how do you feel about that call?
>> I think we're talking by each other in a
massive way. Um,
I have heard uh righteous calls uh for a
toptobottom shift in how ICE is
operating and they are right. I have
heard that some of the awful conduct and
personnel that has permeated this ICE
department needs to get uprooted and
kicked out. And they are right. I've
heard calls that they need to shift ICE
from the Department of Homeland Security
over the to the Department of Justice.
And I think there's a lot of merit to
that as well. But unless the argument is
that we should get rid of immigration
law entirely, which I do not agree with,
then you do need some mechanism to
enforce. You obviously need to change
the personnel and the conduct, which has
been egregious. Outside of that, do I
favor just getting rid of all
immigration and customs enforcement? No,
I don't. I want to turn to
>> and by the way, I'm not in charge of
these decisions either. You know, I'm I
I fill potholes. I'm a mayor. Um and um
I I try to operate in reality because as
mayors, we operate in the reality
business and as an executive of a city,
we make decisions that have an impact.
You can't just sign on to uh
catchphrases and have that be an
effective way of governance. Um, earlier
this week, um, Attorney General Pam
Bondi told Governor Waltz that he could
help bring the situation to an end by
turning over voter registration records.
I mean, what do you make of that? What
do you think is going on?
Why are those two things connected? That
is wildly unconstitutional. That serves
no place in America. We should all be
standing up and saying that's not okay.
And you don't need to take my word for
it. Literally listen to what they're
saying. you know, active threats, um,
like
turn over the voter roles or else
>> or we will continue to do what we're
doing until you turn over the voter
roles. Now, that's not something you
could do in America. I mean, also just
note that you've heard um,
>> what's his name? Steven uh, Miller.
I'm going to screw up the exact phrase,
but he's talked about this iron law
that guides the world. Um, he's talked
about how essentially
>> might is right.
>> Might is right. That's what it is. Might
is right.
might is right is apparently a phrase
that he believes in on the international
level as it applies to, you know,
Greenland, Venezuela.
Uh but is this also uh a
ramification that is being carried out
in cities around the country
uh where
the federal government can use its
awesome and incredible military power
and strength to roll over a city and
make local politicians obey on locally
enacted policies? Is this the kind of
thing where they can carry out a
national plan by coercing localities to
do exactly what they want?
That's the kind of bullying and
intimidation that is deeply concerning.
>> I mean, the undercurrent to all of this
is that the Trump administration has
opened a criminal investigation into you
and Governor Waltz,
alleging that you conspired to impede
federal agents.
As far as you know, where does it stand?
>> I don't know. Um, there has been a
subpoena that was sent to the office of
mayor uh and that we would have a
federal investigation
targeting me and Governor Walls and
others uh for doing something that is a
core responsibility by the way of mine.
and it's written into our city charter
that I have an obligation when I sign
that document to speak on behalf of my
constituents.
So, if that's the charge, then hey,
yeah, I do speak on behalf of my
constituents.
>> Have you gotten a lawyer yet?
>> Yes.
>> Are you afraid that this could end up
with you in prison?
>> Look, I've got faith in the institutions
that we have in America. And at the same
time, look, I'd be lying if I told you
that it wasn't disconcerting. Of course,
it's disconcerting when you've got the
Department of Justice going after you.
Of course it is. It's garbage. It's
complete BS. Um,
I am confident and at the same time, of
course, I have concerns. I'm Look, I'm a
dad, you know. I've got a six-month-old.
Um, actually today I believe she's six
months old.
>> Congratulations.
>> Thank you. Uh I've got a 5-year-old. Um
she largely doesn't know what's going on
uh right now. Uh but someday we'll tell
her. Um and when we do, I want to be
able to tell her that uh our great city
and I as mayor, we weren't intimidated
by this.
>> Mayor, I I can hear how much you care
about obviously your city.
>> Yeah. And this federal operation has
clearly terrified
um many of your constituents regardless
of their immigration status. You know,
some have not left their homes in weeks.
Children are staying home from school.
People are too afraid to go to the
doctor.
>> Even if
there's a draw down of federal agents
and it goes back to the way it was
before, rebuilding trust is clearly
going to be a huge task.
How do you plan to do that?
Keep in mind that we've been building
trust in this city both since 2020 and
even before. Um, we've been building
trust with our police department. We've
been building trust in government. We've
been uh trying to do the necessary
reparation to
make sure that the precision of our
solutions match the precision of the
harm that was initially inflicted. And
so, look, I obviously there's a hell of
a lot of repair that needs to be done
with the trust that has been damaged by
this federal government. And at the same
time, you know,
I've heard a lot of renewed confidence
in our police department, for example.
You know, this is a department that,
needless to say, has not always been an
an emblem of community trust. Um, but
people are seeing the juxtaposition
between the way they're handling things
and the way that ISC is handling things.
Um,
there are so many elected officials
locally and in our state that have stood
up in ways that are inspiring and the
biggest inspiration obviously comes from
people. You know, I get tearary every
time I talk about this, but you know,
it's really it's really amazing um
um the way the people have stood up for
each other. Um, you know, Minneapolis
has been a place of heartbreak in the
past, but the kind of grit
and perseverance that they have
collectively shown, not just with words,
but really clear actions is beautiful.
And the pride that is emanating from a
city that hasn't always felt it is
something that is special in this
moment. I mean, these amazing people in
Minneapolis are just showing so well,
and it's who I know them to be.
>> You know, um,
in my lifetime, uh, I have not seen such
an explicit fight between federal and
state authorities. Um, I think people
see this and it makes them worry about
the state of the country. Governor Waltz
gave an interview this week to The
Atlantic where he compared what is
happening to your city um to that first
battle of the Civil War at Fort at Fort
Sumpter. And I'm just wondering what you
make of that comparison.
>> It's terrifying. I don't think he's
saying that the Civil War is is going to
happen. I think what he's saying uh is
that a significant
and terrifying line is being crossed.
And I would agree with that. We can't go
down that route. We need to unify as a
country. And I think that's exactly what
uh so many people are calling on us to
do right now. A lot of it is also
recognizing the history from which we've
come and not to turn our back on it. Um
it's the one of the oldest cliches in
the book to see you know we're a we're a
country of immigrants and you come to
this country uh with a recognition
that there is that kind of freedom and
there is the sort of stability where you
don't have a fear of a war being fought
based on a different ideological
perspective. Um so I think it's on all
of us to stand up right now to do right.
Um, it's on us as Democratic mayors to
show that democratically run cities can
work.
It's on us to take care of these basics
and do them very well. Um, and it's on
the whole country again to love this
nation more than you love your
respective ideology. Things have gotten
so unbelievably political and
ideological over the last 15 years.
Politics has changed dramatically since
I first entered it. And it's not like
I've been in politics my whole life. Um,
and [music] we need to find a way um
to prevent this pendulum
from violently swinging back and forth.
>> Mayor Jacob Fry, thank you so much. I
really appreciate your time. [music]
>> Thank you for having me.
I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro.
>> And I'm David Marquesy.
>> And we're the hosts of the Interview, an
audio and video [music] podcast from the
New York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel [music]
so you'll never miss an episode.